how to run ACCESS-OM3 and ACCESS-OM3 specification documentation (#893)
ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au: docs/models/run-a-model/run-access-om3.md

    This will prevent _payu_ from submitting another job.

### Error and output log files

#### PBS output files {: .no-toc }
When the model completes a run, PBS writes the standard output and error streams to two files inside the _control_ directory: `<jobname>.o<job-ID>` and `<jobname>.e<job-ID>`, respectively.

These files usually contain logs about _payu_ tasks, and give an overview of the resources used by the job.<br>
To move these files to the `archive` directory, use the following command:
```
payu sweep
```

#### Model log files {: .no-toc }

While the model is running, the model standard output and error streams are saved in the `access-om3.out` and `access-om3.err` files inside the _control_ directory.
The contents of these files show the status of a run as it progresses (or after a failed run has completed).

!!! warning
    At the end of a successful run, these log files are archived to the `archive` directory and will no longer be found in the _control_ directory. If they remain in the _control_ directory after the PBS job for a run has completed, it means the run has failed.

> ### Trouble-shooting

Author: ```suggestion
### Troubleshooting
```

<div class="text-card-group" markdown>
[:fontawesome-brands-github:{: class="twemoji icon-before-text"} {{ model }} configurations]({{github_configs}}){: class="text-card"}
</div>

# Run {{ model }}

## About

{{ model }} is an Ocean Sea Ice model. More information is available in the [{{ model }} overview][model configurations].

The instructions below outline how to run {{ model }} using ACCESS-NRI's deployed software, on the [National Computational Infrastructure (NCI)](https://nci.org.au/about-us/who-we-are) supercomputer [_Gadi_][gadi].

If you are unsure whether {{ model }} is the right choice for your experiment, take a look at the overview of [ACCESS Models](/models).

All {{model}} configurations are open source, licensed under [CC BY 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/?ref=chooser-v1")![CC icon](https://mirrors.creativecommons.org/presskit/icons/cc.svg?ref=chooser-v1){: style="height:1em;margin-left:0.2em;vertical-align:text-top;"}![BY icon](https://mirrors.creativecommons.org/presskit/icons/by.svg?ref=chooser-v1){: style="height:1em;margin-left:0.2em;vertical-align:text-top;"} and available on [ACCESS-NRI GitHub]({{github_configs}}).

> {{model}} release notes are [available on the ACCESS-Hive Forum][release notes] and are updated when new releases are made available.

Reviewer: `release notes` macros is not defined. Delete for now

```suggestion
```

{% set model = "ACCESS-OM3" %}
{% set github_configs = "https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs" %}
{% set example_branch = "dev-MC_25km_jra_ryf" %}
{% set example_folder = "25km_jra55_ryf" %}
[cosima]: https://cosima.org.au
[PBS job]: https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/4.+PBS+Jobs
[payu]: https://github.com/payu-org/payu
[model components]: /models/configurations/access-om/#model-components-{{model}}
[model configurations]: /models/configurations/access-om/#access-om3
[gadi]: https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/0.+Welcome+to+Gadi#id-0.WelcometoGadi-Overview

> [release notes]: https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-om3-release-information/

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[release notes]: https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-om3-release-information/4494
```

Reviewer 2: Shall we delete this line, and add it after 1.0-beta is release ?

Author: Yeah, that sounds cleanest.

!!! release
    This is an **Alpha Release**.<br>
    This model configurations and source code might change before the full release.<br>

>     Limited support is currently provided for this model. Its usage is only recommended for testing by experienced users and collaborators. For a supported and validated model and configuration, see [Run ACCESS-OM2](/models/run-a-model/run-access-om2) instead.

Author: Done. See [0ec7021](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/893/commits/0ec7021c29aefe29bac50605fc902be567b47d4b).

If you want to modify your configuration, refer to [Edit {{ model }} configuration](#edit-{{ model.lower() }}-configuration).

!!! admonition warning
    Files on the `/scratch` drive, such as the _laboratory_ directory, might get deleted if not accessed for several days and the `/scratch` drive is limited in space. For these reasons, all model runs which are to be kept should be moved to `/g/data/` by enabling the _sync_ step in _payu_. To know more refer to [Syncing output data](#syncing-output-data).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Get {{ model }} configuration

All released {{ model }} configurations are available from the [{{ model }} configs]({{ github_configs }}) GitHub repository; released configurations (`release-` in the branch name) are tested and supported by ACCESS-NRI. More information about the available experiments and the naming scheme of the branches can also be found in the [{{ model }} configs]({{ github_configs }}) GitHub repository and the ACCESS-HIVE Docs [{{model}}][model configurations] page.

> The first step is to choose a configuration from those available. For example, if the required configuration is an ocean and sea ice coarse-resolution coupled model, i.e.,  MOM6-CICE6 25km horizontal resolution with repeat-year _JRA55_ forcing (without BGC), then the branch to select is [`{{example_branch}}`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/tree/{{example_branch}}).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first step is to choose a configuration from those available. For example, to run an ocean and sea ice configuration (MOM6-CICE6 at 25km horizontal resolution with repeat-year _JRA55_ forcing (without BGC), one should select the branch [`{{example_branch}}`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/tree/{{example_branch}}).
```

# Force payu to always find, and save, files in this scratch project directory
# shortpath: /scratch/PROJECT_CODE

queue: normal
ncpus: 240
jobfs: 10GB
mem: 960GB

walltime: 02:00:00
```

These lines can be edited to change the [PBS directives](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/PBS+Directives+Explained) for the [PBS job][PBS job].

For example, to run {{ model }} under the `ol01` project (COSIMA Working Group), uncomment the line beginning with `# project` by deleting the `#` symbol and replace `PROJECT_CODE` wih `ol01`:

```yaml
project: ol01
```

!!! warning
    If projects other than `ol01` are used to run {{ model }} configuration, then the `shortpath` field also needs to be uncommented and the path to the desired `/scratch/PROJECT_CODE` added.<br>
    Doing this will make sure the same `/scratch` location is used for the _laboratory_, regardless of which project is used to run the experiment.
    <br><br>
    To run {{ model }}, you need to be a member of a project with allocated _Service Units (SU)_. For more information, check [how to join relevant NCI projects](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account#join-relevant-nci-projects).

### Syncing output data

> The _laboratory_ directory is typically under the `/scratch` storage on _Gadi_, where [files are regularly deleted once they have been unaccessed for a period of time](https://opus.nci.org.au/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=156434436). For this reason climate model outputs need to be moved to a location with longer-term storage.<br>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The _laboratory_ directory is typically under the `/scratch` storage on _Gadi_, where [files are regularly deleted once they have been unaccessed for a period of time](https://opus.nci.org.au/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=156434436). For this reason, it is recommended to move climate model outputs to a location with long-term storage.<br>
```

## Get {{ model }} configuration

!!! danger
    ACCESS-OM3 is currently only in alpha release, no support is currently provided for this model and the model configurations. The model code/configurations will change before the full release. When browsing [the configuration repository on GitHub](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/) any branch that has a prefix `dev-` indicates that it is still in development (eventually `release-` prefix indicates supported configurations -- [example](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om2-configs/tree/release-01deg_jra55_iaf)).

All released {{ model }} configurations are available from the [{{ model }} configs]({{ github_configs }}) GitHub repository.<br>
Released configurations are tested and supported by ACCESS-NRI.

For more information on {{ model }} configurations, check [{{model}}][model configurations] page.

More information about the available experiments and the naming scheme of the branches can also be found in the [{{ model }} configs]({{ github_configs }}) GitHub repository.

The first step is to choose a configuration from those available.<br>

> For example, if the required configuration is the 1° horizontal resolution with repeat-year _JRA55_ forcing (without BGC), then the branch to select is [`dev-1deg_jra55do_ryf`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/tree/dev-1deg_jra55do_ryf).

Reviewer: This whole page needs to be updated for the new branch naming, e.g.`dev-MC_1deg_jra_ryf`

{% set model = "ACCESS-OM3" %}
{% set github_configs = "https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs" %}
[cosima]: https://cosima.org.au
[PBS job]: https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/4.+PBS+Jobs
[payu]: https://github.com/payu-org/payu
[model components]: /models/configurations/access-om/#model-components-{{model}}
[model configurations]: /models/configurations/access-om/#access-om3
[gadi]: https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/0.+Welcome+to+Gadi#id-0.WelcometoGadi-Overview

> 

Author: Okay, we have one [here](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/draft-access-om3-release-information-alpha-release/4372), I'm not convinced it'll keep it's name but at least we have a placeholder. (I'll commit this then fix it.)

    After joining the _vk83_ project, load the `payu` module:
    
        module use /g/data/vk83/modules
        module load payu

    To check that _payu_ is available, run:

        payu --version
    
    <terminal-window>
        <terminal-line data="input">payu --version</terminal-line>
        <terminal-line lineDelay="1000">1.1.6</terminal-line>
    </terminal-window>
    !!! warning
        _payu_ version >=1.1.6 is required

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Get {{ model }} configuration

All released {{ model }} configurations are available from the [{{ model }} configs]({{ github_configs }}) GitHub repository.<br>
Released configurations are tested and supported by ACCESS-NRI.

For more information on {{ model }} configurations, check [{{model}}][model configurations] page.

More information about the available experiments and the naming scheme of the branches can also be found in the [{{ model }} configs]({{ github_configs }}) GitHub repository.

The first step is to choose a configuration from those available.<br>

> For example, if the required configuration is the 1° horizontal resolution with repeat-year _JRA55_ forcing (without BGC), then the branch to select is [`{{ configprefix }}-MCW_100km_jra_ryf`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/tree/dev-MCW_100km_jra_ryf).

Reviewer: I don't think we should be suggesting an MCW branch (we should also probably explain what the M, C, W stand for)

Author: Agreed, that was a typo, now should be fixed in [4bded6f](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/893/commits/4bded6fb949b57b493231afc7c0aff17312346fe). Also added a short explanation.

To clone this branch to a location on _Gadi_ and navigate to that directory, run:
    
    mkdir -p ~/access-om3
    cd ~/access-om3

>     payu clone -b expt -B {{ configprefix }}-MCW_100km_jra_ryf {{ github_configs }} 100km_jra55_ryf

Reviewer: There is no "55" in the branch name, but it is added to the directory name. Is that deliberate?

Author: Yes, in the sense that it was used in ACCESS-OM2 instructions. I thought it was a little odd too but I think people can cope and is generally helpful if these instructions are similar to the OM2 ones.

    mkdir -p ~/access-om3
    cd ~/access-om3
    payu clone -b expt -B {{ configprefix }}-MC_25km_jra_ryf {{ github_configs }} 25km_jra55_ryf
    cd 25km_jra55_ryf

> 

Reviewer 4: There is no `payu clone --restart` mention. 
Doesn't it work for ACCESS-OM3?

Author: It think it would but we don't currently have a restart that we'd suggest using, so I suggest we leave it off for the time being.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## {{ model }} outputs

At the end of a successful model run, output files, restart files and log files are moved from the `work` directory to the `archive` directory.<br>
Symbolic links to these directories are also provided in the _control_ directory for convenience.

If a model run is unsuccessful, the `work` directory is left untouched to facilitate the identification of the cause of the model failure.

Outputs and restarts are stored in subfolders within the `archive` directory, subdivided for each run of the model.<br>
Output and restart folders are called `outputXXX` and `restartXXX`, respectively, where _XXX_ is the run number starting from `000`.

Model components are separated into subdirectories within the output and restart directories.

<terminal-window>
    <terminal-line data="input">cd ~/access-om3/100km_jra55_ryf</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line data="input" directory="~/access-om3/100km_jra55_yaf<">ls</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line class="ls-output-format">output000 pbs_logs restart000</terminal-line>

> </terminal-window>

Reviewer: `cd` produces `ls` output in this animation

Author: I had a look at this in the rendered OM3 doc and OM2 doc but both don't seem to do it so I'm not sure what you're referring to? Feel free to propose a change if you think the problem persists.

Reviewer: The `ls` command is not shown in the animation:

<img width="779" alt="Screenshot 2025-04-23 at 9 15 36 am" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6805d14e-ea40-49f3-a541-05d9a8bc3dc8" />

I've made a suggestion above to hopefully fix this.

Author: Done in commit [b37afd7](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/893/commits/b37afd7c2cf965646634f3df47a6b03aa75ce4b9).

To find out more about configuration settings for the `config.yaml` file, refer to [how to configure your experiment with payu](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html).

### Change run length

One of the most common changes is to adjust the duration of the model run.<br>
For example, when debugging changes to a model, it is common to reduce the run length to minimise resource consumption and return faster feedback on changes.

The run length and restart period are controlled by a set of parameters in the `CLOCK_attributes` section of the `~/access-om3/100km_jra55_ryf/nuopc.runconfig` file:

    CLOCK_attributes::
    ﻿     ...
    ﻿     restart_n = 1
         restart_option = nyears
         ...
         stop_n = 1
         stop_option = nyears
         ...
         
The run length is controlled  by`stop_option` and `stop_n`.<br>
Common options for `stop_option` are `nseconds`, `nhours`, `ndays`, `nmonths` and `nyears`. `stop_n` provides the numerical count for `stop_option`.

The restart period is controlled by `restart_option` and `restart_n`, which set how often restart files are written.<br>
!!! tip

>     It is generally recommended to write restart files at the end of an experiment run. To achieve this, the `restart_*` fields should be set as a divisors of the corresponding `restart_*` values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It is generally recommended to write restart files at the end of an experiment run. To achieve this, the `restart_*` fields should be set as a divisor of the corresponding `stop_*` values.
```

> For example, to run a configuration for 2 months, set the following in the `~/access-om3/100km_jra55_ryf/nuopc.runconfig` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, to run a configuration for 2 months and write restart files at the end of the run, set the following in the `~/access-om3/100km_jra55_ryf/nuopc.runconfig` file:
```

> `restart_option` and `restart_n` control how often restarts are written.<br>

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The restart period is controlled by `restart_option` and `restart_n`, which set how often restart files are written.<br>
```

> In general, users will want to write restarts at the end of each run so should set the `restart_*` controls to match the `stop_*` controls.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
!!! tip
    It is generally recommended to write restart files at the end of an experiment run. To achieve this, the `restart_*` fields should be set as a divisors of the corresponding `restart_*` values.
```

> For example, to run a configuration for 2 months a user should set the following in the `~/access-om3/1deg_jra55_ryf/nuopc.runconfig` file:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, to run a configuration for 2 months, set the following in the `~/access-om3/1deg_jra55_ryf/nuopc.runconfig` file:
```

    CLOCK_attributes::
    ﻿     ...
    ﻿     restart_n = 2
         restart_option = nmonths
         ...
         stop_n = 2
         stop_option = nmonths
         ...

### Modify PBS resources

> If the model has been altered and needs more time to complete, more memory, or needs to be submitted under a different NCI project, you will need to modify the following section in the `config.yaml`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the model configuration has been altered and the experiment needs more time to complete, more memory, or it needs to be submitted under a different NCI project, the following section in the `config.yaml` needs to be modified:
```

On _Gadi_, this is typically in a folder under a project code on `/g/data`.  

_Payu_ has built-in support to sync outputs, restarts and a copy of the _control_ directory git history to another location.<br>
This feature is controlled by the following section in the `config.yaml` file: 
```yaml
# Sync options for automatically copying data from ephemeral scratch space to 
# longer term storage
sync:
    enable: False # set path below and change to true
    path: none # Set to location on /g/data or a remote server and path (rsync syntax)
```
To enable syncing, change `enable` to `True`, and set `path` to a location on `/g/data`, where _payu_ will copy output and restart folders. A sensible `path` could be: `/g/data/$PROJECT/$USER/{{model}}/experiment_name/`.

### Saving model restarts

{{ model }} outputs restart files after every run to allow for subsequent runs to start from a previously saved model state.<br>
Restart files can occupy a significant amount of disk space, and keeping a lot of them is often not necessary.

The `restart_freq` field in the `config.yaml` file specifies a strategy for retaining restart files.<br>

> This is a number (in which case every _nth_ restart file is retained).

Reviewer: This is wrong. `restart_freq` is set in the `nuopc.runconfig`. See the `Change the run length` section

Author: Good catch, I've removed this text and made a reference to the relevant section in [4bded6f](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/893/commits/4bded6fb949b57b493231afc7c0aff17312346fe). Removed some other text in that section that looked out of place, please have a read of the new section and feel free to suggest if anything is still amiss.

#### Platform {: .no-toc }

```yaml
platform: 
    nodesize: 48
```
Set platform-specific default parameters.<br>
In the example above, the default number of cpus per node is set to 48. 
!!! warning
    This might need changing if the configuration is run on hardware with different node structure.

#### Userscripts {: .no-toc }

```yaml
userscripts:
    setup: /usr/bin/bash /g/data/vk83/apps/om3-scripts/payu_config/setup.sh
    archive: /usr/bin/bash /g/data/vk83/apps/om3-scripts/payu_config/archive.sh
```

A dictionary to run scripts or subcommands at various stages of a _payu_ submission.

- `setup` gets called if after model setup, but prior to model execution.
- `archive` gets called after the model execution, but prior to model output archive.
  
For more information about specific `userscripts` fields, check the relevant section of [_payu_ Configuration Settings documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html#postprocessing).

### Create a custom {{ model }} build
All the executables needed to run {{ model }} are pre-built into independent configurations using _Spack_.<br>

> To customise {{ model }}'s build (for example to run {{ model }} with changes in the source code of one of its component), refer to [Modify an ACCESS model's source code](/models/run-a-model/build_a_model#{{model|lower}}).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To customise {{ model }}'s build (for example to run {{ model }} with changes in the source code of one of its component), refer to [Modify and build an ACCESS model's source code](/models/run-a-model/build_a_model#{{model|lower}}).
```

    After joining the _vk83_ project, load the `payu` module:
    
        module use /g/data/vk83/modules
        module load payu

    To check that _payu_ is available, run:

        payu --version
    
    <terminal-window>
        <terminal-line data="input">payu --version</terminal-line>
        <terminal-line lineDelay="1000">1.1.6</terminal-line>
    </terminal-window>
    !!! warning
        _payu_ version >=1.1.6 is required

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Get {{ model }} configuration

All released {{ model }} configurations are available from the [{{ model }} configs]({{ github_configs }}) GitHub repository.<br>
Released configurations are tested and supported by ACCESS-NRI.

For more information on {{ model }} configurations, check [{{model}}][model configurations] page.

More information about the available experiments and the naming scheme of the branches can also be found in the [{{ model }} configs]({{ github_configs }}) GitHub repository.

The first step is to choose a configuration from those available.<br>

> For example, if the required configuration is the 1° horizontal resolution with repeat-year _JRA55_ forcing (without BGC), then the branch to select is [`{{ configprefix }}-MC_100km_jra_ryf`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/tree/dev-MC_100km_jra_ryf).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if the required configuration is MOM6-CICE6 at 1° horizontal resolution with repeat-year _JRA55_ forcing (without BGC), then the branch to select is [`{{ configprefix }}-MC_100km_jra_ryf`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/tree/dev-MC_100km_jra_ryf).
```

</terminal-window>

This can help to isolate issues such as permissions problems accessing files and directories, missing files or malformed/incorrect paths.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## {{ model }} outputs

At the end of a successful model run, output files, restart files and log files are moved from the `work` directory to the `archive` directory.<br>
Symbolic links to these directories are also provided in the _control_ directory for convenience.

If a model run is unsuccessful, the `work` directory is left untouched to facilitate the identification of the cause of the model failure.

Outputs and restarts are stored in subfolders within the `archive` directory, subdivided for each run of the model.<br>
Output and restart folders are called `outputXXX` and `restartXXX`, respectively, where _XXX_ is the run number starting from `000`.

Model components are separated into subdirectories within the output and restart directories.

<terminal-window>
    <terminal-line data="input">cd ~/access-om3/100km_jra55_ryf</terminal-line>

>     <terminal-line data="input" directory="~/access-om3/100km_jra55_yaf<">ls</terminal-line>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <terminal-line data="input" directory="~/access-om3/100km_jra55_ryf">ls</terminal-line>
```

This also needs to be fixed on the OM2 page

Author: Done in commit [b37afd7](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/893/commits/b37afd7c2cf965646634f3df47a6b03aa75ce4b9).

Reviewer: Your commit is missing an important part of my change. I think the `<` after the yaf needs to be removed

Author: Oh I missed that, thanks, trying again in [5bb088d](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/893/commits/5bb088d584b77cda1f704cdb918103549e8f4051)

Author: Does [work](https://access-hive.org.au/pr-preview/pr-893/models/run-a-model/run-access-om3/#trouble-shooting) on my screen now!

Reviewer: This fixed the issue with the animations

{% set model = "ACCESS-OM3" %}
{% set github_configs = "https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs" %}

> {% set example_branch = "dev-MC_25km_jra_ryf" %}

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should be using the `dev` branch in these instructions, the `dev` branch is for development work and changes often.

We can either:
- use a tag,
- use the release branch for the next alpha release (although the CI currently would automatically label this as version 1.0, which is maybe undesirable).

Reviewer 4: The branch used in the experiment should be one that exists and can be used by users at the time the documentation is released.
If the documentation is for an Alpha release (as I believe this is), then the branch should be one you are planning to release (or have released) as an Alpha version.

Reviewer 4: Since it's an Alpha release, it doesn't matter that is a `dev` branch, as long as it's available for users that want to test the release. 
For the full release, a tag should be used.

Author: Since @AndyHoggANU did some alpha testing I've been wondering the same thing @anton-seaice. 

The plan is for these docs to go live with at least an alpha release (possibly beta) but it will in any case use a specific version so I think a tag is appropriate. 

Once this PR is merged it will be in the main part of the website, correct? I suggest we use the first alpha test for now (known stability issues unfortunately) and will update in ~June with the new release.

Reviewer 2: Most other docs and our general procedure (e.g. for OM2) is to clone from the `release-` branch. So I think I prefer that for consistency. Using a tag seemed to create more confusion than it solved !

If we use a release branch we can chat to the release team about whether version 1.0 is appropriate or they add some functionaility for versioning of alpha releases to CI.

Reviewer 4: Using branches for releases is not a standard procedure on GitHub.
There might be reasons why this was the chosen approach, but for releases I would suggest users to use tags instead. This might need changes in the documentation for other models too (ACCESS-OM2, ACCESS-ESM)

Reviewer 2: Ok - this is a much bigger question, but all our access-nri written instructions clone straight from the release branches (for payu configs).

e.g. :
 
https://access-hive.org.au/models/run-a-model/run-access-esm/#model-specific-prerequisites

Author: Regarding @anton-seaice's proposed workflow:
>For consistency with everything else/ simplicity for users, we would like to do our next alpha release for the OM3-25km configuration using the config-CI process (which makes tags automatically on merge to a "release-" branch)

> I imagine instead of
"Configuration release-MC_25km_jra_ryf-1.0"
its
"Configuration release-MC_25km_jra_ryf-alpha1.0"

So I'd like to update this today, suggestions on what I should put there @anton-seaice @CodeGat ? (I don't think it needs to work at this point just reflect the plan)

{% set example_folder = "25km_jra55_ryf" %}
[cosima]: https://cosima.org.au
[PBS job]: https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/4.+PBS+Jobs
[payu]: https://github.com/payu-org/payu
[model components]: /models/configurations/access-om/#model-components-{{model}}
[model configurations]: /models/configurations/access-om/#access-om3
[gadi]: https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/0.+Welcome+to+Gadi#id-0.WelcometoGadi-Overview

> [release notes]: https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/draft-access-om3-release-information-alpha-release/4372

Author: Yes

> [release notes]: https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/draft-access-om3-release-information-alpha-release/4372

Reviewer 4: The links for the forum don't change if the name of the post doesn't change. 
To avoid having to change multiple parts, I would suggest renaming the release notes for ACCESS-OM3 as `ACCESS-OM3 release information` and then specify within the post (not in the title) the release status (for example Alpha).
The link here can then be changed to `https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-om3-release-information/4372` without the need to change it for further releases.

!!! release
    This is an **Alpha Release**.<br>
    This model configurations and source code might change before the full release.<br>

>     No support is currently provided for this model. Its usage is only recommended for testing by experienced users and collaborators. For a supported experience, refer to [Run ACCESS-OM2](/models/run-a-model/run-access-om2) instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Limited support is currently provided for this model. Its usage is only recommended for testing by experienced users and collaborators. For a supported and validated model and configuration, see [Run ACCESS-OM2](/models/run-a-model/run-access-om2) instead.
```

<div class="text-card-group" markdown>
[:fontawesome-brands-github:{: class="twemoji icon-before-text"} {{ model }} configurations]({{github_configs}}){: class="text-card"}
[:notepad_spiral:{: class="twemoji icon-before-text"} Release notes][release notes]{: class="text-card"}
</div>

# Run {{ model }}

## About

> {{ model }} is an Ocean Sea-Ice model. More information is available in the [{{ model }} overview][model configurations].

Reviewer 2: most of the hive seams to use "sea ice" with no hyphen, although its not consistent

Author: Hyphen removed (did a grep and this is the only occurrence across this file and `docs/models/configurations/access-om.md`.

Reviewer 4: What is the preferred way to refer to it (with hyphen or without)?
It definitely needs to be consistent, so once identified the way I can change all the occurrencies to be consistent

> The instructions below outline how to run {{ model }} using ACCESS-NRI's software deployment pipeline, specifically designed to run on the [National Computating Infrastructure (NCI)](https://nci.org.au/about-us/who-we-are) supercomputer [_Gadi_][gadi].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The instructions below outline how to run {{ model }} using ACCESS-NRI's deployed software, on the [National Computating Infrastructure (NCI)](https://nci.org.au/about-us/who-we-are) supercomputer [_Gadi_][gadi].
```

using spack would be the software deployment pipeline, this uses an already deployed piece of software / executable

- **Join NCI projects**<br>
    Join the following projects by requesting membership on their respective NCI project pages:

    - [qv56](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/qv56/join)
    - [vk83](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/vk83/join)
    - [xp65](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/xp65/join)

    For more information on joining specific NCI projects, refer to [How to connect to a project](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/How+to+connect+to+a+project).

- **Payu**<br>
    [Payu][payu] is a workflow management tool for running numerical models in supercomputing environments, for which there is extensive [documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).<br>
    _Payu_ on _Gadi_ is available through a dedicated `conda` environment in the _vk83_ project.<br>
    After joining the _vk83_ project, load the `payu` module:
    
        module use /g/data/vk83/modules
        module load payu

    To check that _payu_ is available, run:

        payu --version
    
    <terminal-window>
        <terminal-line data="input">payu --version</terminal-line>
        <terminal-line lineDelay="1000">1.1.6</terminal-line>
    </terminal-window>

>     !!! warning
>         _payu_ version >=1.1.6 is required

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

This already happens if you follow the instructions

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> ## Get {{ model }} configuration

Author: Good point, implemented.

> All released {{ model }} configurations are available from the [{{ model }} configs]({{ github_configs }}) GitHub repository.<br>
> Released configurations are tested and supported by ACCESS-NRI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All released {{ model }} configurations are available from the [{{ model }} configs]({{ github_configs }}) GitHub repository. These released configurations are tested and supported by ACCESS-NRI.
```

> For more information on {{ model }} configurations, check [{{model}}][model configurations] page.
> 
> More information about the available experiments and the naming scheme of the branches can also be found in the [{{ model }} configs]({{ github_configs }}) GitHub repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information on {{ model }} configurations, check [{{model}}][model configurations] page.

More information about the available experiments and the naming scheme of the branches can also be found in the [{{ model }} configs]({{ github_configs }}) GitHub repository.
```

These two sentences duplicate and slightly conflict each other, and use "More information" too many times :)

Author: Yeah, good spot, yuck! Now cleaned up.

> The first step is to choose a configuration from those available.<br>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first step is to choose a configuration from those available.
```
I think these single line breaks look odd in the rendered version

> For example, if the required configuration is MOM6-CICE6 25km horizontal resolution with repeat-year _JRA55_ forcing (without BGC), then the branch to select is [`{{example_branch}}`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/tree/{{example_branch}}).

Reviewer 2: So far we've talk about ocean and seaice, so switching to MOM6-CICE6 here is a bit confusing.

Author: This has been re-phrased.

To clone this branch to a location on _Gadi_ and navigate to that directory, run:
    
    mkdir -p ~/access-om3
    cd ~/access-om3
    payu clone -b expt -B {{ example_branch }} {{ github_configs }} {{example_folder}}
    cd {{example_folder}}

> In the example above the `payu clone` command clones the 1° repeat-year JRA55 MOM6 (`M`) CICE6 (`C`) configuration (` -B {{ example_branch }}`) as a new experiment branch (`-b expt`) to a directory named `{{example_folder}}`.

Reviewer 3: To be consistent, this should be 25km instead of 1°
```suggestion
In the example above the `payu clone` command clones the 25km repeat-year JRA55 MOM6 (`M`) CICE6 (`C`) configuration (` -B {{ example_branch }}`) as a new experiment branch (`-b expt`) to a directory named `{{example_folder}}`.
```

    <terminal-line lineDelay=1000>Cloned repository from https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs.git to directory: .../access-om/{{example_folder}}</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Created and checked out new branch: expt</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>laboratory path:  /scratch/.../access-om3</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>binary path:  /scratch/.../access-om3/bin</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>input path:  /scratch/.../access-om3/input</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>work path:  /scratch/.../access-om3/work</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>archive path:  /scratch/.../access-om3/archive</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Updated metadata. Experiment UUID: daeee7ff-07e4-4f93-823b-cb7c6e4bdb6e</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Added archive symlink to /scratch/.../access-om3/archive/{{example_folder}}-expt-daeee7ff</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line data="input" directory="~/access-om3">cd {{example_folder}}</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line data="input" directory="~/access-om3/{{example_folder}}"></terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

!!! tip

>     _payu_ uses branches to differentiate between different experiments in the same local git repository.<br>

Reviewer 5: Edit (use code font): `git`

Author: Done

    For this reason, it is recommended to always set the cloned branch name (`expt` in the example above) to something meaningful for the planned experiment.<br>
    For more information refer to this [payu tutorial](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-om2-payu-tutorial/1750#select-experiment-12).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Run {{ model }} configuration

> If you want to modify your configuration, refer to [Edit {{ model }} configuration](#edit-{{ model.lower() }}-configuration).

Author: Moved to the end of the section.

- `archive` &rarr; the directory where the output is stored following each successful run.

Within each of the above directories _payu_ automatically creates subdirectories uniquely named according to the experiment being run.<br>
_Payu_ also creates symbolic links in the _control_ directory pointing to the `archive` and `work` directories.

This design allows multiple self-resubmitting experiments that share common executables and input data to be run simultaneously.

!!! admonition warning
    Files on the `/scratch` drive, such as the _laboratory_ directory, might get deleted if not accessed for several days and the `/scratch` drive is limited in space. For these reasons, all model runs which are to be kept should be moved to `/g/data/` by enabling the _sync_ step in _payu_. To know more refer to [Syncing output data](#syncing-output-data).

### Run configuration

To run {{ model }} configuration execute the following command from within the *control* directory:

    payu run

> This will submit a single job to the queue with the default run length specified in the configuration.<br>

Author: Re-phrased
> This will submit a single job to the supercomputer "queue" with the default run length (1 year) specified in the configuration.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Monitor {{ model }} runs

The `payu run` command prints out the PBS `job-ID` (formatted as `<9-digit-number>.gadi-pbs`), as the last line to the terminal.<br>
To print out information on the status of a specific job, you can execute the following command:
```
qstat <job-ID>
```
<terminal-window>
    <terminal-line data="input">qstat &lt;job-ID&gt;</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line linedelay=500 class="keep-blanks">Job id                 Name             User              Time Use S Queue</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line linedelay=0 class="keep-blanks">---------------------  ---------------- ----------------  -------- - -----</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line linedelay=0 class="keep-blanks">&lt;job-ID&gt;.gadi-pbs      {{example_folder}}   &lt;$USER&gt;           &lt;time&gt;   R normal-exec</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

To show the status of all your submitted [PBS jobs][PBS job], you can execute the following command:
```

> qstat -u $USER

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
qstat
```

```

<terminal-window>

>     <terminal-line data="input">qstat -u $USER</terminal-line>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <terminal-line data="input">qstat</terminal-line>
```

    <terminal-line linedelay=500 class="keep-blanks">Job id                 Name             User              Time Use S Queue</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line linedelay=0 class="keep-blanks">---------------------  ---------------- ----------------  -------- - -----</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line linedelay=0 class="keep-blanks">&lt;job-ID&gt;.gadi-pbs      {{example_folder}}   &lt;$USER&gt;           &lt;time&gt;   R normal-exec</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line linedelay=0 class="keep-blanks">&lt;job-ID&gt;.gadi-pbs      &lt;other-job-name&gt; &lt;$USER&gt;           &lt;time&gt;   R normal-exec</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line linedelay=0 class="keep-blanks">&lt;job-ID&gt;.gadi-pbs      &lt;other-job-name&gt; &lt;$USER&gt;           &lt;time&gt;   R normal-exec</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

> The default name of your job is the name of the _payu_ _control_ directory (`25km_jra55do_ryf` in the example above).<br>

Reviewer 2: The name is `jobname` as specified in `config.yaml` and I don't think it gets changed automatically anywhere, so would be the same as its specified in the config branch.

Author: Good point. Updated:
> The default name of your job is determined by the `jobname` in the [PBS resources section](#modify-pbs-resources) of the `config.yaml` file (for [this](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/blob/release-MC_25km_jra_ryf/config.yaml) configuration it is `025km_jra55do_ryf`).

See [0ec7021](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/893/commits/0ec7021c29aefe29bac50605fc902be567b47d4b).

This can be changed by altering the `jobname` in the [PBS resources section](#modify-pbs-resources) of the `config.yaml` file.

_S_ indicates the status of your run, where:

- _Q_ &rarr; Job waiting in the queue to start
- _R_ &rarr; Job running
- _E_ &rarr; Job ending
- _H_ &rarr; Job on hold

If there are no jobs listed with your `jobname` (or if no job is listed), your run either successfully completed or was terminated due to an error.<br>
For more information, check [NCI documentation](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/FAQ+1%3A+Why+My+Jobs+are+NOT+Running).

!!! tip
    While the model is running, you can monitor its progress by running:
    ```
    grep cur_exp-datetime work/atmosphere/log/matmxx.pe00000.log

>     ```

Reviewer 2: This tip is obviously wrong

You could do 

`tail -f work/log/med.log `

Author: Done. See [0ec7021](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/893/commits/0ec7021c29aefe29bac50605fc902be567b47d4b).

### Stop a run

If you want to manually terminate a run, you can do so by executing:
```
qdel <job-ID>
```
which kills the specified job without waiting for it to complete.

!!! tip

>     If you started an {{ model }} run using the `-n` option (e.g., to [run the model for more than 5 years](#run-configuration-for-more-than-5-years)), but subsequently decide not to keep running after the current process completes, you can create a file called `stop_run` in the _control_ directory.<br>

Reviewer 2: `[run the model for more than 5 years](#run-configuration-for-more-than-5-years))`

links nowhere and is incorrect

Author: Whole tip has been removed. See [0ec7021](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/893/commits/0ec7021c29aefe29bac50605fc902be567b47d4b).

    This will prevent _payu_ from submitting another job.

### Error and output log files

#### PBS output files {: .no-toc }
When the model completes a run, PBS writes the standard output and error streams to two files inside the _control_ directory: `<jobname>.o<job-ID>` and `<jobname>.e<job-ID>`, respectively.

These files usually contain logs about _payu_ tasks, and give an overview of the resources used by the job.<br>

> To move these files to the `archive` directory, use the following commmand:

Reviewer 5: Edit (typo): `command`

Author: Fixed.

```
payu sweep
```

#### Model log files {: .no-toc }

> While the model is running, _payu_ saves the model standard output and error streams in the `access-om3.out` and `access-om3.err` files inside the _control_ directory, respectively.<br>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the model is running, the model standard output and error streams are saved in the `access-om3.out` and `access-om3.err` files inside the _control_ directory.
```

> You can examine the contents of these files to check on the status of a run as it progresses (or after a failed run has completed).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The contents of these files show the status of a run as it progresses (or after a failed run has completed).
```

!!! warning

>     At the end of a successful run these log files are archived to the `archive` directory and will no longer be found in the _control_ directory. If they remain in the _control_ directory after the PBS job for a run has completed it means the run has failed.

Reviewer 5: Edit (comma):  `... run, these log files...` 
Edit: `... run has completed, the run has failed.`

Author: Done

> ### Trouble-shooting

Reviewer 2: Troubleshooting is one word

    <terminal-line>archive path: /scratch/$PROJECT/$USER/access-om3/archive</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Loading input manifest: manifests/input.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Loading restart manifest: manifests/restart.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Loading exe manifest: manifests/exe.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Setting up access-om3</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Checking exe and input manifests</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Writing manifests/restart.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>/usr/bin/bash /g/data/vk83/apps/om3-scripts/payu_config/setup.sh</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

This can help to isolate issues such as permissions problems accessing files and directories, missing files or malformed/incorrect paths.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## {{ model }} outputs

At the end of a successful model run, output files, restart files and log files are moved from the `work` directory to the `archive` directory.<br>
Symbolic links to these directories are also provided in the _control_ directory for convenience.

> If a model run is unsuccessful, the `work` directory is left untouched to facilitate the identification of the cause of the model failure.

Reviewer 5: Edit: `... to facilitate identifying the cause of model failure.`

Author: Done.

Outputs and restarts are stored in subfolders within the `archive` directory, subdivided for each run of the model.<br>
Output and restart folders are called `outputXXX` and `restartXXX`, respectively, where _XXX_ is the run number starting from `000`.

Model components are separated into subdirectories within the output and restart directories.

<terminal-window>
    <terminal-line data="input">cd ~/access-om3/{{example_folder}}</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line data="input" directory="~/access-om3/{{example_folder}}">ls</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line class="ls-output-format">output000 pbs_logs restart000</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Edit {{ model }} configuration

This section describes how to modify {{ model }} configuration.<br>
The modifications discussed in this section can change the way {{ model }} is run by _payu_, or how its specific [model components] are configured and coupled together.

> The `config.yaml` file located in the _control_ directory is the _Master Configuration_ file, which controls the general model configuration. It contains several parts, some of which it is more likely will need modification, and others which are rarely changed without having a deep understanding of how the model is configured.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `config.yaml` file located in the _control_ directory is the _payu_ configuration, which controls the configuration of the experimenter manager. It contains several parts, some of which it is more likely will need modification, and others which are rarely changed without having a deep understanding of how the model is configured.
```

To find out more about configuration settings for the `config.yaml` file, refer to [how to configure your experiment with payu](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html).

### Change run length

One of the most common changes is to adjust the duration of the model run.<br>
For example, when debugging changes to a model, it is common to reduce the run length to minimise resource consumption and return faster feedback on changes.

The run length and restart period are controlled by a set of parameters in the `CLOCK_attributes` section of the `~/access-om3/{{example_folder}}/nuopc.runconfig` file:

    CLOCK_attributes::
    ﻿     ...
    ﻿     restart_n = 1
         restart_option = nyears
         ...
         stop_n = 1
         stop_option = nyears
         ...
         
The run length is controlled  by`stop_option` and `stop_n`.<br>

> Common options for `stop_option` are `nseconds`, `nhours`, `ndays`, `nmonths` and `nyears`. `stop_n` provides the numerical count for `stop_option`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Common options for `stop_option` are `ndays`, `nmonths` and `nyears`. `stop_n` provides the numerical count for `stop_option`.
```

The restart period is controlled by `restart_option` and `restart_n`, which set how often restart files are written.<br>
!!! tip
    It is generally recommended to write restart files at the end of an experiment run. To achieve this, the `restart_*` fields should be set as a divisor of the corresponding `stop_*` values.

For example, to run a configuration for 2 months and write restart files at the end of the run, set the following in the `~/access-om3/{{example_folder}}/nuopc.runconfig` file:

    CLOCK_attributes::
    ﻿     ...
    ﻿     restart_n = 2
         restart_option = nmonths
         ...
         stop_n = 2
         stop_option = nmonths
         ...

### Modify PBS resources

> If the model configuration has been altered and the experiment needs more time to complete, more memory, or it needs to be submitted under a different NCI project, the following section in the `config.yaml` needs to be modified:

Reviewer 5: Edit: `... the experiment needs: more time to complete, more memory, or to be submitted under a different NCI project, the following section in the `config.yaml` requires modification:`

Author: Done.

```yaml
# If submitting to a different project to your default, uncomment line below
# and replace PROJECT_CODE with appropriate code. This may require setting shortpath
# project: PROJECT_CODE

# Force payu to always find, and save, files in this scratch project directory
# shortpath: /scratch/PROJECT_CODE

queue: normal
ncpus: 240
jobfs: 10GB
mem: 960GB

walltime: 02:00:00
```

These lines can be edited to change the [PBS directives](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/PBS+Directives+Explained) for the [PBS job][PBS job].

For example, to run {{ model }} under the `ol01` project (COSIMA Working Group), uncomment the line beginning with `# project` by deleting the `#` symbol and replace `PROJECT_CODE` wih `ol01`:

```yaml
project: ol01
```

!!! warning

>     If projects other than `ol01` are used to run {{ model }} configuration, then the `shortpath` field also needs to be uncommented and the path to the desired `/scratch/PROJECT_CODE` added.<br>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If projects other than `ol01` are used to run {{ model }} configuration, then the `shortpath` field also needs to be uncommented and the path to the desired `/scratch/PROJECT_CODE` added.<br>
```

I don't understand why this warning is here? What is it trying to protect against ?

Author: Not sure but naively to allow access to the appropriate files?

I note this comment in the config.yaml

> Force payu to always find, and save, files in this scratch project directory
 (you may need to add the corresponding PBS -l storage flag in sync_data.sh)
 shortpath: /scratch/v45

    Doing this will make sure the same `/scratch` location is used for the _laboratory_, regardless of which project is used to run the experiment.
    <br><br>

>     To run {{ model }}, you need to be a member of a project with allocated _Service Units (SU)_. For more information, check [how to join relevant NCI projects](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account#join-relevant-nci-projects).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    To run {{ model }}, you need to be a member of a project with allocated _Service Units (SU)_. For more information, check [how to join relevant NCI projects](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account#join-relevant-nci-projects).
```

This comment is out of place and could be in `Prerequisites`

Author: Moved. See [0ec7021](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/893/commits/0ec7021c29aefe29bac50605fc902be567b47d4b).

### Syncing output data

> The _laboratory_ directory is typically under the `/scratch` storage on _Gadi_, where [files are regularly deleted once they have been unaccessed for a period of time](https://opus.nci.org.au/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=156434436). For this reason climate model outputs need to be moved to a location with longer term storage.<br>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The _laboratory_ directory is typically under the `/scratch` storage on _Gadi_, where [files are regularly deleted once if there are not accssed for a period of time](https://opus.nci.org.au/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=156434436). For this reason model outputs need to be moved to a location with longer term storage.<br>
```

Author: See [8773192](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/commit/8773192aa72d569d7b98c7f130d4d38eeb7edcb3).

> The _laboratory_ directory is typically under the `/scratch` storage on _Gadi_, where [files are regularly deleted once they have been unaccessed for a period of time](https://opus.nci.org.au/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=156434436). For this reason climate model outputs need to be moved to a location with longer term storage.<br>

Reviewer 5: Edit: `longer-term`

Author: Done

On _Gadi_, this is typically in a folder under a project code on `/g/data`.  

> _Payu_ has built-in support to sync outputs, restarts and a copy of the _control_ directory git history to another location.<br>

Reviewer 5: Edit (use code font): `git`

Author: Done

This feature is controlled by the following section in the `config.yaml` file: 
```yaml
# Sync options for automatically copying data from ephemeral scratch space to 
# longer term storage
sync:
    enable: False # set path below and change to true
    path: none # Set to location on /g/data or a remote server and path (rsync syntax)
```
To enable syncing, change `enable` to `True`, and set `path` to a location on `/g/data`, where _payu_ will copy output and restart folders. A sensible `path` could be: `/g/data/$PROJECT/$USER/{{model}}/experiment_name/`.

> 

Reviewer 2: In my view we should be recommending everyone uses sync and have it higher up in the instructions

Author: Okay, I've made the language stronger. See [0ec7021](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/893/commits/0ec7021c29aefe29bac50605fc902be567b47d4b).

### Saving model restarts

> {{ model }} outputs restart files after every run to allow for subsequent runs to start from a previously saved model state.<br>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{ model }} outputs restart files after every run to allow for subsequent runs to start from a previously saved model state.<br>
```

We just configured it above, so this is not really true

Author: True by default though, yes? 

Wording has been modified here and above. See [0ec7021](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/pull/893/commits/0ec7021c29aefe29bac50605fc902be567b47d4b).

Restart files can occupy a significant amount of disk space, and keeping a lot of them is often not necessary.

> 
> For information about changing the run length, refer to [Change run length](#change-run-length).<br>
> 
> The most recent sequential restarts are retained, and only deleted after a permanently archived restart file has been produced.
> 
> For more information, check [_payu_ Configuration Settings documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html#model).
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

_Payu_ can be configured to prune the number of restart files kept. By default, _payu_ will only keep most recent couple of restarts and the restarts from every fifth model run. For more information and to change this setting, check [_payu_ Configuration Settings documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html#model).
```

### Other configuration options

!!! warning
    The following sections in the `config.yaml` file control configuration options that are rarely modified, and often require a deeper understanding of how {{ model }} is structured to be safely changed.

#### Model configuration {: .no-toc }

> This section tells _payu_ which driver to use for the main model configuration (`access-om3`) and the location of all inputs that are common to all its [model components].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section tells _payu_ which driver to use for the main model configuration (`access-om3`) and the location of all input files.
```

    - /g/data/vk83/prerelease/configurations/inputs/access-om3/mom/surface_salt_restoring/global.25km/2025.01.30/salt_sfc_restore.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/prerelease/configurations/inputs/access-om3/share/grids/global.25km/2025.02.17/topog.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/prerelease/configurations/inputs/access-om3/share/meshes/global.25km/2025.02.17/access-om3-25km-ESMFmesh.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/prerelease/configurations/inputs/access-om3/share/meshes/global.25km/2025.02.17/access-om3-25km-nomask-ESMFmesh.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/configurations/inputs/access-om3/share/meshes/share/2024.09.16/JRA55do-datm-ESMFmesh.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/configurations/inputs/access-om3/share/meshes/share/2024.09.16/JRA55do-drof-ESMFmesh.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/prerelease/configurations/inputs/access-om3/cmeps/remap_weights/global.25km/2025.02.17/access-om3-25km-rof-remap-weights.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/experiments/inputs/JRA-55/RYF/v1-4/data
```

#### Runlog {: .no-toc }

```yaml
runlog: true
```
When running a new configuration, _payu_ automatically commits changes with `git` if `runlog` is set to `true`.

!!! warning
    This should not be changed as it is an essential part of the provenance of an experiment.<br>

>     _payu_ updates the manifest files for every run, and relies on `runlog` to save this information in the `git` history, so there is a record of all inputs, restarts, and executables used in an experiment.

Reviewer 5: Edit (remove comma):` ... inputs, restarts and executables...`

Author: @heidinett says no to the oxford comma!

done

> #### Platform {: .no-toc }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Platform {: .no-toc }
```

I dont think this section adds value

Author: Removed.

```yaml
platform: 
    nodesize: 48
```
Set platform-specific default parameters.<br>

> In the example above, the default number of cpus per node is set to 48. 

Reviewer 5: Edit: `CPUs` (not `cpus`)

Author: I think this got removed with one of Anton's comments above?

!!! warning
    This might need changing if the configuration is run on hardware with different node structure.

#### Userscripts {: .no-toc }

```yaml
userscripts:
    setup: /usr/bin/bash /g/data/vk83/apps/om3-scripts/payu_config/setup.sh
    archive: /usr/bin/bash /g/data/vk83/apps/om3-scripts/payu_config/archive.sh
```

> A dictionary to run scripts or subcommands at various stages of a _payu_ submission.

Reviewer 5: Incomplete sentence. Missing a verb?

Author: Re-phrased

- `setup` gets called if after model setup, but prior to model execution.
- `archive` gets called after the model execution, but prior to model output archive.
  
For more information about specific `userscripts` fields, check the relevant section of [_payu_ Configuration Settings documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html#postprocessing).

### Create a custom {{ model }} build

> All the executables needed to run {{ model }} are pre-built into independent configurations using _Spack_.<br>

Reviewer 5: Edit: change `into` to `in`

Author: I think `in` here is misleading because it's followed by configurations which has a specific meaning here. Simplified with

>All the executables needed to run {{ model }} are pre-built using _Spack_.<br>

> To customise {{ model }}'s build (for example to run {{ model }} with changes in the source code of one of its component), refer to [Modify and build an ACCESS model's source code](/models/run-a-model/build_a_model#{{model|lower}}).

Reviewer 5: Edit (missing comma): `(e.g., to run...)`

Author: Done

## Get Help

If you have questions or need help regarding {{ model }}, consider creating a topic in the [COSIMA category of the ACCESS-Hive Forum](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/c/cosima/29).<br>

> For assistance on how to request help from ACCESS-NRI, follow the [guidelines on how to get help](/about/user_support/#still-need-help).

Reviewer 2: ```
If you have questions or need help regarding {{ model }}, consider creating a topic in the [COSIMA category of the ACCESS-Hive Forum](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/c/cosima/29).<br>
For assistance on how to request help from ACCESS-NRI, follow the [guidelines on how to get help](/about/user_support/#still-need-help).
```

These two sentences should be combined, as they say similar but different things and its not clear what to do after reading them

Author: Re-phrased:
> For further {{ model }} assistance, have a look at [general guidance](/about/user_support/#still-need-help) on how to request help from ACCESS-NRI. Specifically, consider creating a topic in the [COSIMA category of the ACCESS-Hive Forum](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/c/cosima/29). In the case of a configuration bug, please file a [GitHub issue here](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/issues/new?assignees=&labels=External&projects=&template=blank.md&title=). <br>

> <custom-references>

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need this section at all, but we definately can remove the cosima link.

Author: As earlier (not sure why this has come up twice?) re-phrased:
> For further {{ model }} assistance, have a look at [general guidance](/about/user_support/#still-need-help) on how to request help from ACCESS-NRI. Specifically, consider creating a topic in the [COSIMA category of the ACCESS-Hive Forum](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/c/cosima/29). In the case of a configuration bug, please file a [GitHub issue here](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/issues/new?assignees=&labels=External&projects=&template=blank.md&title=). <br>

</terminal-window>

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Edit {{ model }} configuration

This section describes how to modify {{ model }} configuration.<br>
The modifications discussed in this section can change the way {{ model }} is run by _payu_, or how its specific [model components] are configured and coupled together.

The `config.yaml` file located in the _control_ directory is the _Master Configuration_ file, which controls the general model configuration. It contains several parts, some of which it is more likely will need modification, and others which are rarely changed without having a deep understanding of how the model is configured.

To find out more about configuration settings for the `config.yaml` file, refer to [how to configure your experiment with payu](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html).

### Change run length

One of the most common changes is to adjust the duration of the model run.<br>
For example, when debugging changes to a model, it is common to reduce the run length to minimise resource consumption and return faster feedback on changes.

> The run length is controlled by the `restart_period` field in the `&date_manager_nml` section of the `~/access-om3/1deg_jra55_ryf/accessom3.nml` file:
> 
>     &date_manager_nml
>         forcing_start_date = '1958-01-01T00:00:00'
>         forcing_end_date = '2019-01-01T00:00:00'<br>
>         ! Runtime for a single segment/job/submit, format is years, months, seconds,
>         ! two of which must be zero.
>         restart_period = 5, 0, 0
>     &end
> 
> The format is `restart_period = <number_of_years>, <number_of_months>, <number_of_days>`.
> 
> For example, to make the model run for 1 year, 4 months and 10 days, change `restart_period` to:
> 
>     restart_period = 1, 4, 10
> 
> !!! warning
>     While `restart_period` can be reduced, it should not be increased to more than 5 years to avoid errors.
>     <br><br>
>     It is also important to differentiate between _run length_ and _total experiment length_.<br>
>     For more information about their difference, or how to run the model for more than 5 years, refer to [Run configuration for more than 5 years](#run-configuration-for-more-than-5-years).
> 
> #### Run configuration for more than 5 years
> 
> As mentioned in the [Change run length](#change-run-length) section, you cannot specify more than 5 years as `restart_period`.<br>
> If you want to run a configuration for more than 5 years, you need to use the `-n` option:
> 
>     payu run -n <number-of-runs>
> 
> This will run {{ model }} `number-of-runs` consecutive times, each with a *run length* equal to `restart_period`.<br>
> This way, the *total experiment length* will be `restart_period * number-of-runs`. 
> 
> For example, to run a configuration for a total of 50 years with a `restart_period` of 5 years, the `number-of-runs` should be set to `10`:
> 
>     payu run -n 10

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The run length and restart period are controlled by a set of parameters in the `~/access-om3/1deg_jra55_ryf/nuopc.runconfig` file:

    CLOCK_attributes::
    ﻿     ...
    ﻿     restart_n = 1
         restart_option = nyears
         ...
         stop_n = 1
         stop_option = nyears
         ...
         
`stop_option` and `stop_n` control how long the model will run.<br>
Common options for `stop_option` are `nseconds`, `nhours`, `ndays`, `nmonths` and `nyears`. `stop_n` provides the numerical count for `stop_option`.

`restart_option` and `restart_n` control how often restarts are written.<br>
In general, users will want to write restarts at the end of each run so should set the `restart_*` controls to match the `stop_*` controls.

For example, to run a configuration for 2 months a user should set the following in the `~/access-om3/1deg_jra55_ryf/nuopc.runconfig` file:

    CLOCK_attributes::
    ﻿     ...
    ﻿     restart_n = 2
         restart_option = nmonths
         ...
         stop_n = 2
         stop_option = nmonths
         ...

```

    <br><br>
    To run {{ model }}, you need to be a member of a project with allocated _Service Units (SU)_. For more information, check [how to join relevant NCI projects](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account#join-relevant-nci-projects).

### Syncing output data

The _laboratory_ directory is typically under the `/scratch` storage on _Gadi_, where [files are regularly deleted once they have been unaccessed for a period of time](https://opus.nci.org.au/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=156434436). For this reason climate model outputs need to be moved to a location with longer term storage.<br>
On _Gadi_, this is typically in a folder under a project code on `/g/data`.  

_Payu_ has built-in support to sync outputs, restarts and a copy of the _control_ directory git history to another location.<br>
This feature is controlled by the following section in the `config.yaml` file: 
```yaml
# Sync options for automatically copying data from ephemeral scratch space to 
# longer term storage
sync:
    enable: False # set path below and change to true
    path: none # Set to location on /g/data or a remote server and path (rsync syntax)

>     exclude:
>       - '*.nc.*'
>       - 'iceh.????-??-??.nc'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

```
To enable syncing, change `enable` to `True`, and set `path` to a location on `/g/data`, where _payu_ will copy output and restart folders. A sensible `path` could be: `/g/data/$PROJECT/$USER/{{model}}/experiment_name/`.

> !!! admonition tip
>     The {{model}} default configurations include a [userscript](#userscripts) in the _sync_ step that concatenates daily history/diagnostic output from the Sea-Ice model (CICE5) into monthly files. This speeds up access and saves storage space, but will only run if _sync_ is enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

We're doing this at the archive step at the moment for OM3 (which occurs before syncing). Its probably a level of detail we don't need at this point.

### Saving model restarts

{{ model }} outputs restart files after every run to allow for subsequent runs to start from a previously saved model state.<br>
Restart files can occupy a significant amount of disk space, and keeping a lot of them is often not necessary.

The `restart_freq` field in the `config.yaml` file specifies a strategy for retaining restart files.<br>

> This can either be a number (in which case every _nth_ restart file is retained), or one of the following pandas-style datetime frequencies:
> 
> - `YS` &rarr; start of the year
> - `MS` &rarr; start of the month
> - `D` &rarr; day
> - `H` &rarr; hour
> - `T` &rarr; minute
> - `S` &rarr; second

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a number (in which case every _nth_ restart file is retained).
```

Date based restart pruning is in payu-master but not in payu 1.1.6

> For example, to preserve the ability to restart {{ model }} every 50 model-years, set:
> ```yaml
> restart_freq: '50YS'
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

{% set model = "ACCESS-OM3" %}
{% set github_configs = "https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs" %}
[cosima]: https://cosima.org.au
[PBS job]: https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/4.+PBS+Jobs
[payu]: https://github.com/payu-org/payu
[model components]: /models/configurations/access-om/#model-components
[model configurations]: /models/configurations/access-om/#access-om3
[gadi]: https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/0.+Welcome+to+Gadi#id-0.WelcometoGadi-Overview

[:fontawesome-brands-github:{: class="twemoji icon-before-text"} {{ model }} configurations]({{github_configs}}){: class="text-card"}

!!! danger

>     ACCESS-OM3 is currently only in alpha release, no support is currently provided for this model and the model configuration and model code will change before the full release. Using ACCESS-OM3 is only recommended for experienced (or brave!) users and collaborators developing ACCESS models. For a supported experience, see [run ACCESS-OM2](/models/run-a-model/run-access-om)

Author: Right now no but these docs are intended to support the alpha release so I think it's ok as is.

{{ model }} is an Ocean Sea-Ice model. More information is available in the [{{ model }} overview][model configurations].

The instructions below outline how to run {{ model }} using ACCESS-NRI's software deployment pipeline, specifically designed to run on the [National Computating Infrastructure (NCI)](https://nci.org.au/about-us/who-we-are) supercomputer [_Gadi_][gadi].

If you are unsure whether {{ model }} is the right choice for your experiment, take a look at the overview of [ACCESS Models](/models).

All {{model}} configurations are open source, licensed under [CC BY 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/?ref=chooser-v1")![CC icon](https://mirrors.creativecommons.org/presskit/icons/cc.svg?ref=chooser-v1){: style="height:1em;margin-left:0.2em;vertical-align:text-top;"}![BY icon](https://mirrors.creativecommons.org/presskit/icons/by.svg?ref=chooser-v1){: style="height:1em;margin-left:0.2em;vertical-align:text-top;"} and available on [ACCESS-NRI GitHub]({{github_configs}}).

## Prerequisites

### General prerequisites

Before running {{ model }}, you need to [Set Up your NCI Account](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account).

### Model-specific prerequisites

> - **Join the _vk83_ and _qv56_ projects at NCI**<br>

Author: Done in the latest commit, also added to om2 docs.

> - **Join the _vk83_ and _qv56_ projects at NCI**<br>

Reviewer: It's not currently needed for om2

> - **Join the _vk83_ and _qv56_ projects at NCI**<br>

Author: Isn't the forward plan for om2 to use it? As in, won't they also need their own esm datastores? My impression is that we were moving lots of things to xp65?

    After joining the _vk83_ project, load the `payu` module:
    
        module use /g/data/vk83/modules
        module load payu

    To check that _payu_ is available, run:

        payu --version
    
    <terminal-window>
        <terminal-line data="input">payu --version</terminal-line>
        <terminal-line lineDelay="1000">1.1.3</terminal-line>
    </terminal-window>
    !!! warning
        _payu_ version >=1.1.3 is required

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Get {{ model }} configuration

All released {{ model }} configurations are available from the [{{ model }} configs]({{ github_configs }}) GitHub repository.<br>
Released configurations are tested and supported by ACCESS-NRI, as an adaptation of those originally developed by [COSIMA][cosima].

For more information on {{ model }} configurations, check [{{model}}][model configurations] page.

More information about the available experiments and the naming scheme of the branches can also be found in the [{{ model }} configs]({{ github_configs }}) GitHub repository.

The first step is to choose a configuration from those available.<br>

> For example, if the required configuration is the 1° horizontal resolution with repeat-year _JRA55_ forcing (without BGC), then the branch to select is [`dev-1deg_jra55do_ryf`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/tree/dev-1deg_jra55do_ryf).

Author: Made some tweaks to change the language here (see latest commit). Also added a big warning...

> ACCESS-OM3 is currently only in alpha release, no support is currently provided for this model and the model configurations. The model code/configurations will change before the full release. When browsing [the configuration repository on GitHub](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om3-configs/) any branch that has a prefix `dev-` indicates that it is still in development (eventually `release-` prefix indicates supported configurations -- [example](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-om2-configs/tree/release-01deg_jra55_iaf)).

    The {{model}} default configurations include a [userscript](#userscripts) in the _sync_ step that concatenates daily history/diagnostic output from the Sea-Ice model (CICE5) into monthly files. This speeds up access and saves storage space, but will only run if _sync_ is enabled.

### Saving model restarts

{{ model }} outputs restart files after every run to allow for subsequent runs to start from a previously saved model state.<br>
Restart files can occupy a significant amount of disk space, and keeping a lot of them is often not necessary.

The `restart_freq` field in the `config.yaml` file specifies a strategy for retaining restart files.<br>
This can either be a number (in which case every _nth_ restart file is retained), or one of the following pandas-style datetime frequencies:

- `YS` &rarr; start of the year
- `MS` &rarr; start of the month
- `D` &rarr; day
- `H` &rarr; hour
- `T` &rarr; minute
- `S` &rarr; second

For example, to preserve the ability to restart {{ model }} every 50 model-years, set:
```yaml
restart_freq: '50YS'
```

The most recent sequential restarts are retained, and only deleted after a permanently archived restart file has been produced.

> For more information, check [_payu_ Configuration Settings documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html#model).

Reviewer: @anton-seaice would you mind taking a look at this to see what is valid? Some of this stuff changed while I was on leave I think?

Reviewer 2: This section is basically correct. Its worth noting the default restart_freq value is 5 (every 5th restart is kept)

Reviewer 2: Oh sorry - date-based restart pruning is in payu master but not in payu-1.1.6. ill make suggestions

Author: Great, thanks, feel free to just edit the code if that is practical.

Author: @anton-seaice has resolved this, see latest commit.

    - /g/data/vk83/configurations/inputs/access-om3/share/meshes/share/2024.09.16/JRA55do-datm-ESMFmesh.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/configurations/inputs/access-om3/share/meshes/share/2024.09.16/JRA55do-drof-ESMFmesh.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/configurations/inputs/access-om3/share/grids/global.1deg/2020.10.22/topog.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/configurations/inputs/access-om3/mom/grids/mosaic/global.1deg/2020.05.30/ocean_hgrid.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/configurations/inputs/access-om3/mom/grids/vertical/global.1deg/2023.07.28/ocean_vgrid.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/configurations/inputs/access-om3/mom/initial_conditions/global.1deg/2020.10.22/ocean_temp_salt.res.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/configurations/inputs/access-om3/mom/surface_salt_restoring/global.1deg/2020.05.30/salt_sfc_restore.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/configurations/inputs/access-om3/cice/grids/global.1deg/2024.05.14/grid.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/configurations/inputs/access-om3/cice/grids/global.1deg/2024.05.14/kmt.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/configurations/inputs/access-om3/cice/initial_conditions/global.1deg/2023.07.28/iced.1900-01-01-10800.nc
    - /g/data/vk83/configurations/inputs/JRA-55/RYF/v1-4/data
```

> The `name` field is not actually used for the configuration run, so it can be safely ignored.

Reviewer: What `name` field?

Author: This has been removed, see latest commit.

#### Platform

```yaml
platform: 
    nodesize: 48
```
Set platform-specific default parameters.<br>
In the example above, the default number of cpus per node is set to 48. 
!!! warning
    This might need changing if the configuration is run on hardware with different node structure.

#### Userscripts

```yaml
userscripts:
    error: tools/resub.sh
    run: rm -f resubmit.count
    sync: /g/data/vk83/apps/om2-scripts/concatenate_ice/concat_ice_daily.sh 
```

A dictionary to run scripts or subcommands at various stages of a _payu_ submission.

- `error` gets called if the model does not run correctly and returns an error code.
- `run` gets called after the model execution, but prior to model output archive.
- `sync` gets called at the start of the sync pbs job. For more information refer to [Syncing output data](#syncing-output-data).
  
For more information about specific `userscripts` fields, check the relevant section of [_payu_ Configuration Settings documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html#postprocessing).

> 

Reviewer: This whole section is still about OM2. Unfortunately the suggestion functionality doesn't work when there's a code block, but something like:

```yaml
userscripts:
    setup: /usr/bin/bash /g/data/vk83/apps/om3-scripts/payu_config/setup.sh
    archive: /usr/bin/bash /g/data/vk83/apps/om3-scripts/payu_config/archive.sh
```

A dictionary to run scripts or subcommands at various stages of a _payu_ submission.

- `setup` gets called if after model setup, but prior to model execution.
- `archive` gets called after the model execution, but prior to model output archive.
- `sync` gets called after model archival, but prior to any postprocessing operations, such as `payu collate`.
  
For more information about specific `userscripts` fields, check the relevant section of [_payu_ Configuration Settings documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html#postprocessing).

Author: Made these changes (I think!) in the latest commit, feel free to check that I understood your suggestion correctly.

Reviewer: Have you pushed it?

Author: Just did, [here](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/access-hive.org.au/commit/3b001c54b0b71222369eae9379f423929c3c787a)

> #### Miscellaneous
> 
> The following configuration settings should never require changing:
> 
> ```yaml
> stacksize: unlimited
> mpirun: --mca io ompio --mca io_ompio_num_aggregators 1
> qsub_flags: -W umask=027
> env:
>     UCX_LOG_LEVEL: 'error'
> ```
> 

Reviewer: Not relevant for OM3

```suggestion
```

> ### Edit a single {{ model }} component configuration
> 
> Each of [{{ model }} components][model components] contains additional configuration options that are read in when the model component is running.<br>
> These options are typically useful to modify the physics used in the model, the input data, or the model variables saved in the output files.
> 
> These configuration options are specified in files located inside a subfolder of the _control_ directory, named according to the submodel's `name` specified in the `config.yaml` `submodels` section (e.g., configuration options for the _ocean_ component are in the `~/access-om3/1deg_jra55_ryf/ocean` directory).<br>
> To modify these options please refer to the User Guide of the respective model component.
> 
> ### Create a custom {{ model }} build
> All the executables needed to run {{ model }} are pre-built into independent configurations using _Spack_.<br>
> To customise {{ model }}'s build (for example to run {{ model }} with changes in the source code of one of its component), refer to [Modify an ACCESS model's source code](/models/run-a-model/build_a_model#{{model|lower}}).
> 

Reviewer: Not relevant for OM3

```suggestion
```
